

## 5. Discussion

### 5.1. A robust model of categorization

The model studied in this paper can be viewed as a rudimentary model of human learning. In this model, at the outer level of processing, there is a layer of neurons that produces a random summary of any stimuli presented. It is the summary that is then processed by learning algorithms. The outer level plays the role of random projection. The main insight of the model is that even a random summary that is independent of any specific concept and independent of the distribution on examples (stimuli), can preserve the essential elements necessary for learning the category. The ease of learning and the extent to which the summary preserves the concepts depends on their robustness-the more robust a concept, the shorter a summary needs to be and the easier it is to learn. In this section, we draw from work in cognitive and neuropsychology to see how the predictions of this model hold up. Our model goes beyond previous ones that made similar predictions in suggesting a simple physiological mechanism.

---

An interesting prediction of our model is that learning concepts that are more robust requires fewer examples. This prediction is supported by many psychological studies (Glass, et al., 1979; Komatsu, 1992; Reed, 1982; Reed \& Friedman, 1973; Rosch, 1978; Rosch et al., 1976), in particular those that refer to concept formation as stemming from the family resemblence perspective (for a detailed account of other prominent views, see (Komatsu, 1992; Rakinson \& Oakes, 2003)). The family resemblence perspective argues that categories (concept classes) as formed by humans are hierarchical (Reed, 1982), with three clear levels called the Superordinate, Basic and Subordinate. For example, for the Superordinate category of Mammals, some Basic level categories are Elephant, Dog, Human, and the Subordinate categories for Elephant would be African Elephant and Indian Elephant. Similarly, the Superordinate category of Musical Instruments has below it the Basic level categories of Guitar, Piano, Drum, etc. and Guitar, has below it Subordinate categories such as Folk Guitar and Steel Guitar. The Basic level categories are considered the most important, and are the most clearly demarcated from each other. In our terminology they are the most robust, and we expect them to be easier to learn. This is indeed the case as noted by Rosch et al. (1976), "...basic level categories are the most differentiated from one another and they are therefore the first categories we learn and the most important in language."

---

A related theory of how humans form categories is based on the notion of Prototypes (Glass, et al., 1979; Komatsu, 1992). The essential predictions of this theory can also be derived from robustness. Prototypes represent the most typical members of a category. The theory says that we abstract a prototype for a category by forming some weighted average of (a subset of) the defining features of examples from the category. A subsequent instance is compared to the prototype, and if it has a sufficient degree of similarity to the prototype then it is judged to be a member of the category. This explains the results of studies where it is found that when asked to list examples of a category, subjects consistently list members that are closer to the prototype both earlier and more often (e.g., for the category Bird, the examples Sparrow and Robin are produced more often than Ostrich) Rosch (1978). Further when asked to classify instances, it is found that examples closer to the prototype are classified more quickly. Similar results were found in studies with artificially generated categories (Reed \& Friedman, 1973).

---

For a prototype $P$, we could define a family of nested concepts within the category of $P$ according to the distance from $P$. Then the members of the innermost concept are very similar to $P$, the members of the next concept are a bit more varied, and the variation increases as the maximum distance of the concepts from $P$ grows. In other words the innermost concept is the most robust in terms of demarcating the category from objects that are not members (of the family category), and the robustness decreases as we move outward. The arguments in this paper imply that the inner concepts would be easier to learn and label than the outer ones. This is exactly what was observed in the aforementioned studies.

---

In our model as the organism is presented with a given stimulus, a random summary of its characteristics is captured. After another member of the same family is observed another summary of characteristics is abstracted. The characteristics that are shared among stimuli from the same "family" would in time lead to a set of summaries with analogous characteristics. These analogous characteristics would give rise to a protypical family member (say Robin for the bird family) because it embodies many of the characteristics which have a greater probability of appearing in these "random summaries" since they are more common in the family (small, feathers, flies) and not other characteristics which are likely to be atypical (large, does not fly for Ostrich or has no feathers for Penguin).

---

Another question that our model addresses concerns the need to make distinctions between perceptual (red, square, loud) or conceptual categories (dessert vs. salad or good vs. evil). This issue is prominent in current research on categorization (Mandler, 2003). While the examples we have mentioned (birds, elephants and guitars) can be described as perceptual (objectbased) categories, it is worth noting that our model also applies to conceptual categories. The idea is that along with physical characteristics, abstract characteristics (that are also ultimately functions of the stimuli, e.g. "soulfulness" might include Steel Guitar and Saxophone) are preserved by the random summaries. The predictions of our model are similar to those of the family resemblance view; the latter has been successfully used to go beyond object-based categores to psychological phenomena such as emotions and personality traits (Komatsu, 1992). At the outer-level mechanism of our model, there is no need for separate learning systems for categorization.

---

In the same vein, the current model also speaks to the broad neuropsychological issue of whether it is necessary to propose a multiple-system (i.e., various brain regions) model as opposed to a single-system model (general brain processing) to account for object recognition on the one hand and categorization on the other (Knowlton, 1999). We see our model as a single-system model that provides a general physiological "outer-level" for learning. As such we believe this model partially answers the call to "develop formalized single-system and multiple-system mathematical models of categorization, to collect rich sets of parametric data using both normal and brain-damaged population and to test the ability of the respective models to account quatitatively for the data." (Nosofsky \& Zaki, 1969).

### 5.2. Open problems

In the discrete setting, an $\ell$-robust concept is one where a positive example retains its label even if an $\ell$-fraction of its attributes are changed. An important open problem in computational learning theory is that of learning DNF formulae from the uniform distribution without membership queries. This concept class can be viewed as intersections of half-spaces with robustness $1 / \sqrt{n}$. If there is an algorithm for learning DNF formulae in time polynomial in $n$ and $1 / \ell$, this would solve the problem of learning DNF formulae without membership queries.

---

We have seen how robustness reduces the learning complexity of some important concept classes. We conclude with the following questions: What are concept classes for which robustness does not reduce learning complexity? In particular, what is the complexity of learning robust polynomial threshold functions?

